# i18n for Developers

## Translating strings

User visible strings need to be translated.\
Only exception – technical terms and abbreviations that don't change across languages, such as "IP" or "HTTP".

Ways to translate:
1. In templates: using **| translate** pipe.
2. In components: using **TranslateService.instant()**.\
You can assume translations will be ready by the time you call this method.

## String Extraction
Strings then are extracted by message extractor and put in `src/assets/i18n/` folder for translation.\
This happens automatically on build, but you can also run it manually with:

```bash
yarn extract
```

### Translating Strings Outside of Components
Sometimes you may want to translate strings that are outside of components or services.\
In this case, you can wrap the string in `T()` function to make it visible for message extractor.

Note that `T()` is not a translation function, it just marks the string for extraction.\
You still need to use the `| translate` pipe or `TranslateService.instant()` to actually get the translated string.

#### Additional Helpers
Also see:
`mapToOptions()`

## Parameters and Pluralization

### Using Parameters
```typescript
// ✅ Good
this.translate.instant('Delete {username}', { username: user.username });

// ❌ Bad - string concatenation, parser won't extract it correctly
this.translate.instant('Delete ' + user.username)

// ❌ Bad - doesn't give translators opportunity to change order of words
this.translate.instant('Delete ') + user.username
```

For plural forms use:

```typescript
'{count, plural, one {# file} other {# files}}'
```

Additional options may be available, search for ICU MessageFormat for details.

### Conditional messages

```html
<!-- ✅ Good -->
<span>{{ condition ? ('Yes' | translate) : ('No' | translate) }}</span>

<!-- ❌ Bad – parser won't extract string -->
<span>{{ (condition ? 'Yes' : 'No') | translate }}</span>
  ```

## PR Conflicts
When encountering conflicts in translation files, it's often easier to just accept one side and let message extractor regenerate files.

99% of the time you won't have to resolve conflicts manually.

For example, if you are working on a branch and there is a conflict with `master`, just overwrite your changes with `master` and let message extractor regenerate the files.

## Testing Translations

Translation files are automatically validated in CI with the help of:
```bash
yarn validate-translations
```
